.. _subgrouping:

Subgrouping
===========

Subgrouping (sometimes known as "Grouping" or "Audio Grouping") is a way
to collect related signals together to apply some common treatment,
before sending them on to the main mix. One standard application is to
group several tracks belonging to the same instrument or section (such
as a drum kit or horn section), to be able to adjust their volume with a
single fader, after their inner balance has been set using the track
faders.

Ardour supports both audio and MIDI subgroup busses, so it's possible to
collect MIDI events from multiple tracks and send them to a multi-voice
software synth or sampler.

.. note::
   Ardour also provides :ref:`VCAs <control-masters-mixer-strips>` that
   is a very flexible way to adjust the volume of a group of
   tracks/busses when no additional processing is needed.

Create a subgroup from an existing Track/Bus group is done by
right-clicking on the relevant :ref:`group tab
<the_track_and_bus_group_list>`, and choosing **Add New Subgroup Bus**.
A new bus will be created and every member of the track group will have
its outputs disconnected from other destinations and then connected to
the new bus inputs. The bus outputs will feed the master bus unless
manual connections have been selected in the session preferences. The
bus will be named after the track group name.

Alternatively, a group can be created manually, by first adding a new
bus, then, for each track to be fed in the subgroup bus, disconnecting
its outputs from the master and connecting it to the inputs of the
subgroup bus instead. This can be done in the global audio patchbay or
on a track by track basis via the output button of each track's channel
strip.

Remove a subgroup (bus) is done by right -clicking on the track group
tab, and selecting **Remove subgroup bus**. Simply deleting the bus
itself will **not** restore signal routing to the way it was before the
addition of the subgroup bus —tracks that had been subgrouped will be
left with their main outputs disconnected.
