.. _understanding_playlists:

Understanding playlists
=======================

A **playlist** is a list of regions ordered in time. It defines which parts
of which source files should be played and when. Playlists are a fairly
advanced topic, and can be safely ignored for many types of audio
production. However, the use of playlists allows the audio engineer more
flexibility for tasks like multiple takes of a single instrument,
alternate edits of a given recording, parallel effects such as reverb or
compression, and other tasks.

Each audio **track** in Ardour is really just a mechanism for taking a
playlist and generating the audio stream that it represents. As a
result, editing a track really means modifying its playlist in some way.
Since a playlist is a list of regions, most of the modifications involve
manipulating regions: their position, length and so forth. This is
covered in the chapter :ref:`Working With Regions
<working_with_regions>`.

This page covers some of the things that can be done with playlists as
objects in their own right.

Tracks are not playlists
------------------------

It is important to understand that a track *is not* a playlist. A track
*has* a playlist. A track is a mechanism for generating the audio stream
represented by the playlist and passing it through a signal processing
pathway. At any point in time, a track has a single playlist associated
with it. When the track is used to record, that playlist will have one
or more new regions added to it. When the track is used for playback,
the contents of the playlist will be heard. The playlist associated with
a track can be changed at (almost) any time, and tracks can even share
playlists.

Some other DAWs use the term **"virtual track"** to define a track that
isn't actually playing or doing anything, but can be mapped/assigned to
a real track. This concept is functionally identical to Ardour's
playlists. We just like to be little more clear about what is actually
happening rather than mixing old and new terminology ("virtual" and
"track"), which might be confusing.

Playlists are cheap
-------------------

One thing to bear in mind is that playlists are cheap. They do not cost
anything in terms of CPU consumption, and they have very minimal efforts
on memory use. So generating new playlists whenever needed is
recommended. They are not equivalent to tracks, which require extra CPU
time and significant memory space, or audio files, which use disk space,
or plugins that require extra CPU time. If a playlist is not in use, it
occupies a small amount of memory, and nothing more.
