Ardour overview
===============

**Ardour** is a professional digital workstation for working with audio and
MIDI.

Ardour is meant for…
--------------------

Audio Engineers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Ardour's core user group: people who want to record, edit, mix and
master audio and MIDI projects. When you need complete control over your
tools, when the limitations of other designs get in the way, when you
plan to spend hours or days working on a session, Ardour is there to
make things work the way you want them to.

Musicians
~~~~~~~~~

Being the best tool to record talented performers on actual instruments
has always been a top priority for Ardour. Rather than being focused on
electronic and pop music idioms, Ardour steps out of the way to
encourage the creative process to remain where it always has been: a
musician playing a carefully designed and well built instrument.

Soundtrack Editors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sample accurate sync and shared transport control with video playback
tools allows Ardour to provide a fast and natural environment for
creating and editing soundtracks for film and video projects.

Composers
~~~~~~~~~

Arrange audio and MIDI using the same tools and same workflow. Use
external hardware synthesizers or software instruments as sound sources.
From sound design to electro-acoustic composition to dense multitrack
MIDI editing, Ardour can help.

Ardour features…
----------------

.. _multitrack-recording:

Audio and MIDI Multi-Track Recording and Editing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Any number of tracks and busses. Non-linear editing. Non-destructive
(and destructive!) recording. Any bit depth, any sample rate. Dozens of
file formats.

.. _plugins:

Plugins with Full Sample Accurate Automation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

AudioUnit, LV2, LinuxVST and LADSPA formats. FX plugins. Software
instruments. MIDI processors. Automate any parameters. Physically
manipulate them via control surfaces. Distribute processing across as
many (or as few) cores as you want.

.. _transport-and-control-surfaces:

Transport Sync and External Control Surfaces
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Best-in-industry sync to MIDI timecode and LTC. Send and receive MIDI
Machine Control. Sync with JACK transport and MIDI clock. Dedicated
Mackie Control protocol support, pre-defined mappings for many MIDI
controllers plus dynamic MIDI learn. Use OSC to drive almost any
operation in Ardour.

.. _signal-routing:

Powerful Anywhere-to-Anywhere Signal Routing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Complex signal flows are simple and elegant. Inputs and outputs connect
to your hardware and/or other applications. Use sends, inserts and
returns freely. Connections can be one-to-many, many-to-one or
many-to-many. Tap signal flows at any point. If you can't connect in the
way you want with Ardour, it probably can't be done.

Video Timeline
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Import a single video and optionally extract the soundtrack from it.
Display a frame-by-frame (thumbnail) timeline of the video. Use a
Video-monitor window, or full-screen display, of the imported video in
sync with any of the available ardour timecode sources. Lock
audio-regions to the video: Move audio-regions with the video at
video-frame granularity. Export the video, cut start/end, add blank
frames and/or mux it with the soundtrack of the current-session.
